In planning, practitioners mainly rely on administrative registers and census data for population statistics. Yet they need more than aggregated data: they require detailed information on conditions needing intervention, prioritising resorces where needs are most acute, and to provide solutions across various spatial scales, from individual blocks to large zones. To close the gap between aggregated data and spatially disaggregated, decision-relevant information, this study proposes a methodological framework that enriches population datasets with housing characteristics inferred from RS imagery. 

First Equation belwo was applied to disaggregate village-level population data to the scale of household units, utilizing 
variables such as the estimated average household size, building size,
$P = P_0 + \left(\frac{A_i}{\sum_j A_j}\right) \cdot \Delta P_v$
where $P_i$ is the modelled population of unit i; P0 denotes the baseline population, estimated using the lower-bound of the [official household size range](https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/1847a3c9e593491f8d61c0c216d258df#n-zV50p4); $A_i$ represents the building size of a probable household i; and $∆P_v$ is the residual population term that ensures population balance after deducting the sum of initial allocations from the total surveyed village population. This approach ensures that each building receives a reasonable population while maintaining consistency with village-level population totals.  A [housing wealth map](https://doi.org/10.1080/10095020.2025.2543496), derived from remote sensing imagery using [deep learning-based multi-class building extraction](https://github.com/enyandwi7/Housing-wealth-mapping-with-YOLO-and-Mask2Former-multiclass-instance-segmentation) which extend beyond [simple extraction of buildng shapes](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s41064-024-00297-9), was used to disagregate village population data. We collected data from district-level One Stop Centres across Rwanda. Given that the relevant administrative reporting structure is already established, our framework can be readily integrated into existing statistical system to generate timely and reliable urban data. In particular, village leaders are institutionally positioned to collect population nformation and report to high-up administrative units, thereby facilitating efficient data aggregation and transmission. This approach could strengthen routine data flows and support national statistical initiatives, including those conducted by the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR).  

Following SDG 11.3.1, which considers the ratio of land consumption rate to population growth by typology (Infill, Extension, Leapfrogging), we adapted the approach to single-timeframe data by estimating the land area associated with each development type. After estimating the population for each building classified as high- or low-wealth, this data were aggregated into 100 × 100m grid cells. A bivariate analysis, a  method previously explore to identify locations of imbalance between population clustering and development indicators was applied. This method offer additional insights through post hoc analysis of identified hotspots. In our case, both population and housing wealth values were reclassified into high and low classes to construct a 2x2 matrix within the bivariate analysis framework. To facilitate meaningful data interpretation, we adhered to the density standards delineated in the current official land use plan of Rwanda.  Considering land scarcity in Rwanda, a population density threshold of $\tau = 70$ individuals per hectare (equivalent to 7,000 individuals per km<sup>2</sup>) is desired in cities  and hence it was applied  as the criterion for categorizing population counts into 'high population' (HP) and 'low population' (LP) classes. For wealth classification, each cell was labelled wealthier (HW) or less wealthy (LW) based on the roof class with the largest surface area in that cell.

A zonal typology was then formulated, delineating distinct categories as follows: HP-HW; HP-LW; LP-HW; and LW-LW. HP-HW zones represent cells where the majority of buildings are predicted to be of high wealth and where $P \geq \tau$. HP-LW zones are cells where $P \geq \tau$ but are characterized by visibly substandard housing. Based on literature review, these areas present heightened risks of spreading disorder in peri-urban areas, thus necessitating that urban planners and managers prioritize in-situ upgrading to enhance residents' quality of life without causing displacement. LP-HW zones are mainly urban planned areas with dispersed housing where $P < \tau$. In these areas, land is lavishly used for personal enjoyment, but over time these settlements strain national resources, as providing infrastructure and services (e.g., water, power, roads) to widely dispersed homes is inefficient and unsustainable. LW-LW zones exhibit predominantly rural characteristics with scattered houses, $P < \tau$, and a visibly low wealth profile. Planning in these areas must be proactive, focusing on designing, shaping, and creating a desired future, rather than passively awaiting the emergence of informal settlements, as upgrading these is more costly.

The resulting 100x100m gridded population density dataset, assumed to be highly accurate compared to exisitng dataset and suitable for applications such as the evaluation of global models and the calibration or training of population distribution models, is publicly available [here]([https://github.com/enyandwi7/Population-Housing-Structures-in-Rwanda-Inferred-from-Above-/blob/main/reference.tif](https://github.com/enyandwi7/Population-Housing-Structures-in-Rwanda-Inferred-from-Above-/blob/main/Gridded%20population%20data%20of%20Rwanda%202022_From%20smallest%20administrative%20units_villages.tif). In addition, the derived land consumption metric [maps](https://github.com/enyandwi7/Population-Housing-Structures-in-Rwanda-Inferred-from-Above-/blob/main/Population_Wealth%20Patterns.jpg) and [summary statistics](https://github.com/enyandwi7/Population-Housing-Structures-in-Rwanda-Inferred-from-Above-/blob/main/Population_wealth%20patterns%20for%20all%20cities%2C%20town%20and%20rural%20areas.png), which provide insights into development quality in Rwanda, spatial disparities in development patterns, and land-use efficiency, are accessible here. These data products are intended to support evidence-based planning, including strategies for urban infill and spatial reorganization.

If you find the data useful kindly cite our work as: 

Nyandwi, E. , Gerke M., Kuffer M., Diaz P. & Tuyizere, T. (2025). _Unequal Landscapes: A Spatial-Demographic Analysis of Housing Wealth and Land Use Patterns in Rwanda_. Manuscript under review.
 

